## 5.2 Checkpointing

In addition to loading data, we will also need to save models as we train. When running jobs, we often want to be able to resume a training run that for some reason stopped midway (e.g., due to your job timing out, machine failure, etc). Even when all goes well, we might also want to later have access to intermediate models (e.g., to study training dynamics post-hoc, take samples from models at different stages of training, etc).

A checkpoint should have all the states that we need to resume training. We of course want to be able to restore model weights at a minimum. If using a stateful optimizer (such as `AdamW`), we will also need to save the optimizer’s state (e.g., in the case of `AdamW`, the moment estimates). Finally, to resume the learning rate schedule, we will need to know the iteration number we stopped at. PyTorch makes it easy to save all of these: every `nn.Module` has a `state_dict()` method that returns a dictionary with all learnable weights; we can restore these weights later with the sister method `load_state_dict()`. The same goes for any `nn.optim.Optimizer`. Finally, `torch.save(obj, dest)` can dump an object (e.g., a dictionary containing tensors in some values, but also regular Python objects like integers) to a file (path) or file-like object, which can then be loaded back into memory with `torch.load(src)`.

### Problem (checkpointing): Implement model checkpointing (1 point)

Implement the following two functions to load and save checkpoints:

`def save_checkpoint(model, optimizer, iteration, out)` should dump all the state from the first three parameters into the file-like object `out`. You can use the `state_dict` method of both the model and the optimizer to get their relevant states and use `torch.save(obj, out)` to dump `obj` into `out` (PyTorch supports either a path or a file-like object here). A typical choice is to have `obj` be a dictionary, but you can use whatever format you want as long as you can load your checkpoint later.

This function expects the following parameters:

-   `model`: `torch.nn.Module`
-   `optimizer`: `torch.optim.Optimizer`
-   `iteration`: `int`
-   `out`: `str | os.PathLike | typing.BinaryIO | typing.IO[bytes]`

`def load_checkpoint(src, model, optimizer)` should load a checkpoint from `src` (path or file-like object), and then recover the model and optimizer states from that checkpoint. Your function should return the iteration number that was saved to the checkpoint. You can use `torch.load(src)` to recover what you saved in your `save_checkpoint` implementation, and the `load_state_dict` method in both the model and optimizers to return them to their previous states.

This function expects the following parameters:

-   `src`: `str | os.PathLike | typing.BinaryIO | typing.IO[bytes]`
-   `model`: `torch.nn.Module`
-   `optimizer`: `torch.optim.Optimizer`

Implement the `[adapters.run_save_checkpoint]` and `[adapters.run_load_checkpoint]` adapters, and make sure they pass `uv run pytest -k test_checkpointing`.
